Assignment 4: Encrypting the Platform
============================

## Introduction

When working with 3rd party platforms changes occur frequently and often times break backward compatibility with the programs we write. An organization might decide to move in a new direction, fix a critical security flaw, or change system behaviors. When these types of breaking changes occur, the systems and services that consume 3rd party platforms are responsible for updating their code to ensure future compatibility. 

For the past two months, partnering organizations (e.g., ICS 32 students :) ) have been raising concerns over the poor security of the ICS 32 Distributed Social platform. In response to the concerns raised by its partners, the ICS32 Distributed Social organization has implemented a new authentication scheme. Rather than rely on a user name and password, users will now be required to supply an [ed25519](https://ed25519.cr.yp.to/) public-key with each message. Additionally, all messages sent to the server must be encrypted with the DS server's public key.

So for this assignment you will need to update your program to support the new authentication process for the DS server.

:::{admonition,warning} New Version of Profile Module Available
This program makes use of a new version of the Profile module. It is backwards compatible, so you can safely replace previous versions used in your program. You can download the new version here: [Profile v0.1.2](https://ics32.markbaldw.in/resources/profile.py)
:::


### Summary of Program Requirements
* Subclass the Profile class in your DS program to support encryption and public key authentication.
* Read and understand documentation for a 3rd party library.
* Update your DS program to communicate with the new DS Server.

### Learning Goals
* Use inheritance to extend class functionality
* Install and use of 3rd party libraries
* Solidify understanding of modules and classes in Python

## Program Requirements

The ICS32 Distributed Social organization has decided to use the [NaCl](https://nacl.cr.yp.to/) networking and encryption library to help strengthen its social media platform. Rather than implement the NaCl specification directly, the DS org has decided to use a 3rd party library that is already written in Python called [PyNaCl](https://github.com/pyca/pynacl).

To prepare your ICS32 DS program for network communication using NaCl, there are a number of tasks you must complete. They have been divided into individual parts below to help you prioritize your program requirements.

### Part 1

#### Installing the PyNaCl Package
The first thing you will need to do is install the PyNaCl package to your instance of Python:

```ipython3
pip install pynacl
```

If all goes well, you should see a message that is similar to "Successfully installed pynacl-1.4.0". To verify that the package was installed, open up your Python shell and type:

```ipython3
>>> import nacl
>>>
```

If you receive any response other than a new line of input, it's likely that pip installed the package to a different version of Python. Check your messages and make sure that you are testing the package in the same instance of the Python shell as where you installed the package.

#### Prepare your Environment

Fortunately, the DS org has released a module to abstract away some of the steps required to interact with their new encrypted platform. So the next thing you will want to do is download the module and test it. A simple test harness is included in the following snippet, you are free to use it to validate that your environment is properly configured.

[ICS32 Distributed Social NaCl Encoder](https://ics32.markbaldw.in/resources/nacldsencoder.py)

```ipython3
# create a new NaClDSEncoder object
ds_enc = NaClDSEncoder()
# generate a new keypair
ds_enc.generate()
# test the keys
print(ds_enc.raw_keypair)
print(ds_enc.public_key)
print(ds_enc.private_key)
print(ds_enc.keypair)
```

If you have everything set up properly, you should see some output that will look similar to the following (NOTE: your values will be different every time you run the **`generate()`** function!):

```ipython3
b'\x1a\xdf\xe0\xc7\xd8\x82\x82|p\xce\xbcI$\x1b\x7f\xe1\xcf\xc9!;\x18\xf3v\xa4-\xd7\x95W,\r\x9e7'
b'FnrtbaamKZf5NuaLmZ5UsAmLKrNgN8dNIXVvtFf79jM='
b'Gt/gx9iCgnxwzrxJJBt/4c/JITsY83akLdeVVywNnjc='
b'FnrtbaamKZf5NuaLmZ5UsAmLKrNgN8dNIXVvtFf79jM=Gt/gx9iCgnxwzrxJJBt/4c/JITsY83akLdeVVywNnjc='
```

### Part 2

For part 2, you will need to write a new class to handle the new encryption policies required by the DS org. Since the DS server will now expect your program to authenticate with a public key and send posts that have been encrypted using the DS public key, you are going to need rethink the way your current program works. Fortunately, the Profile module that you have been using in your DS program, is still quite useful. Therefore, the best course of action is probably to subclass the Profile class. To help you with this task, you will use the following skeleton to get started:

```ipython3
# TODO: Install the pynacl library so that the following modules are available
# to your program.
import nacl.utils
from nacl.public import PrivateKey, PublicKey, Box

# TODO: Import the Profile and Post classes
# TODO: Import the NaClDSEncoder module

    
# TODO: Subclass the Profile class
class NaClProfile:
    """
    TODO: Complete the initializer method. Your initializer should create the follow three 
    public data attributes:

    public_key:str
    private_key:str
    keypair:str

    Whether you include them in your parameter list is up to you. Your decision will frame 
    how you expect your class to be used though, so think it through.
    """
    def __init__():
        pass

    """
    TODO: Complete the generate_keypair method.

    This method should use the NaClDSEncoder module to generate a new keypair and populate
    the public data attributes created in the initializer.

    returns keypair:str    
    """
    def generate_keypair(self) -> str:
        pass

    """
    TODO: Complete the import_keypair method.

    This method should use the keypair parameter to populate the public data attributes created by
    the initializer. 
    
    NOTE: you can determine how to split a keypair by comparing the associated data attributes generated
    by the NaClDSEncoder
    """
    def import_keypair(self, keypair: str):
        pass

    """
    TODO: Override the add_post method to encrypt post entries.

    Before a post is added to the profile, it should be encrypted. Remember to take advantage of the
    code that is already written in the parent class.

    NOTE: To call the method you are overriding from the parent class you can use the built-in super:
    super().add_post(...)
    """

    """
    TODO: Override the get_posts method to decrypt post entries.

    Since posts will be encrypted when the add_post method is used, you will need to ensure they are 
    decrypted before returning them to the calling code.

    returns Posts:list
    
    NOTE: To call the method you are overriding from the parent class you can use the built-in super:
    super().get_posts()
    """

    """
    TODO: Complete the encrypt_entry method.
    This method will be used to encrypt messages using a 3rd party public key, such as the one that
    the DS server provides.
    
    returns encrypted_message:bytes 
    """
    def encrypt_entry(self, entry:str, public_key:str) -> str:
        pass
```

You can also download the [code directly if you prefer](https://ics32.markbaldw.in/resources/naclprofile.py).

Since we will be required to send encrypted messages to the new DS server, we might as well add support for local encryption as well to prevent unwanted parties from reading our journal entries. Therefore, in this class you will extend the Profile module to not only encrypt messages that will be sent to the DS server, but also messages stored in the **`.dsu`** file.

The comments in the skeleton code will provide you with some guidance on what you need to do. In addition to the incomplete methods, you will also need to override two methods from the Profile class. If done correctly, all of your new data attributes as well as your encrypted messages will be saved to the **`.dsu`** file passed to the **`save_profile`** method, without having to change anything else!

To learn how to encrypt and decrypt information using a keypair, you will need to consult the documentation for the module. The [main page for the docs](https://pynacl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is a good place to start if you want to learn more about PyNaCl. However, since you are only required to implement a small portion of the overall PyNaCl module, you may find the examples on the [Public Key Encryption](https://pynacl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/public/#examples) page to be the most helpful.

Once your new **`Profile`** subclass has been completed, you can validate it by running the following program:


```ipython3
from Profile import Profile, Post
from NaClProfile_solution import NaClProfile

np = NaClProfile()
kp = np.generate_keypair()
print(np.public_key)
print(np.private_key)
print(np.keypair)

ds_pubkey = "jIqYIh2EDibk84rTp0yJcghTPxMWjtrt5NW4yPZk3Cw="
ee = np.encrypt_entry("Encrypted Message for DS Server", ds_pubkey)
print(ee)

# Add a post to the profile and check that it is decrypted.
np.add_post(Post("Hello Salted World!"))
p_list = np.get_posts()
print(p_list[0].getpost())

# Save the profile
np.save_profile(PATH/TO/DSU)

# Create a new NaClProfile object and load the dsu file.
np2 = NaClProfile()
np2.load_profile(PATH/TO/DSU)
# Import the keys
np2.import_keypair(kp)

# Verify the post decrypts properly
p_list = np2.get_posts()
print(p_list[0].getpost())
```

Now, there's one last thing to consider with this new authentication format. By subclassing the Profile class, we have saved a lot of time and effort that would have been spent duplicating all of its features. However, as a result, we also have no ability to import the new **`public_key`** and **`private_key`** data attributes. However, since we are no longer using the data attributes **`username`** and **`password`**, we could get around this obstacle by passing the value set in **`public_key`** to **`username`** and **`private_key`** to **`password`**. Alternatively, we might prefer to keep the keypair generated for a **`NaClProfile`** object in a separate file and use the **`import_keypair`** method to create the keys for the profile. In either case, the decision is up to you. Just remember that once post entries have been encrypted with a keypair, they can **only** be decrypted with the same keypair!

### Part 3

For the final part of this assignment, you will need to make sure your new authentication and encryption interface works with the new DS Server. There have been a few changes to the DS Server. First, it is no longer running at the previous URL. A new URL will be provided via Slack. Second, you will receive a slightly revised response message:

```ipython3
# Error messages will primarily be received when a user has not been 
# established for the active session. For example, sending 'bio' or 'post' 
# before 'join'
{"response": {"type": "error", "message": "An error message will be contained here."}}

# Ok messages will be receieved after every successful send command. 
# They likely will not be accompanied by a message.
{"response": {"type": "ok", "message": "", "public_key":""}}
```
Although the response message for errors has not changed, you should expect to find a new key in the message called **`public_key`**. The value for this key will be required to encrypt and send messages to the new DS server. If your message cannot be decrypted, you will receive an error message. You will use this public key with the **`encrypte_entry`** function that is part of the **`NaClProfile`** skeleton class.

If you have implemented your **`NaClProfile`** class and modified your communication with the DS Server successfully, your program from assignment 2 should continue to work as expected, just a little more secure.

### Extra Credit

There is no extra credit for this assignment.

### How we will grade your submission
																		
This assignment will be graded on a 12-point scale, with the 12 points being allocated completely to whether or not you submitted something that meets all of the above requirements. The following rubric will be used:

Requirements and Function | 10 pts
: Does the program do what it is supposed to do?
: Are there any bugs or errors?

Quality and Design        | 2 pts 
: Is the code well designed?
: Is the code clearly documented?

By now you should be clearly documenting your code and expending effort to ensure that your code design follows the conventions we have been discussing throughout the class. Therefore, we will be taking a much stricter stance on quality and design than we have in previous assignments.

