Assignment 5: Encrypted Graphical User Interface
============================

## Introduction
So we have finally arrived at the end. Over the course of the last four assignments you have built, from the ground up, a feature rich program in Python. The code that you have written enables a person to write personal journal entries, publish those entries to an online server, and enrich them with data from web API's. Now it's time to bring all of these features together by moving them from the command line to the windowed world of the graphical user interface.

For the past two months, partnering organizations (e.g., ICS 32 students :) ) have been raising concerns over the poor security and privacy of the ICS 32 Distributed Social platform. In response to the concerns raised by its partners, the ICS32 Distributed Social organization (e.g., ICS 32 instructors) has implemented a new authentication scheme. Rather than rely on a user name and password, users will now be required to supply an [ed25519](https://ed25519.cr.yp.to/) public-key with each message. Additionally, all messages sent to the server must first be encrypted with the DSP server's public key.

So for this assignment you will need to update your program to support the new authentication process for the DSP server and integrate your existing code into a new graphical interface using the [Tkinter](https://docs.python.org/3/library/tkinter.html) graphical toolkit. 

### Summary of Program Requirements
* Subclass the Profile class in your DS program to support encryption and public key authentication.
* Read and understand documentation for a 3rd party library.
* Update your DS program to communicate with the new DS Server.
* Modify and extend the ICS 32 DS Demo Tkinter interface.
* Integrate existing code with Tkinter widgets.
* Modify and update Tkinter widgets to display program information to a user.

### Learning Goals
* Use inheritance to extend class functionality
* Install and use 3rd party libraries
* Learn how to build basic Graphical User Interfaces with Tkinter and Python.
* Write event handlers and callback functions.
* Structure and organize a GUI program with classes.

## Program Requirements

```{note}

The full assignment will be released during week 8.

```

