Assignment 5: A Graphical User Interface
============================

## Introduction
So we have finally arrived at the end. Over the course of the last four assignments you have built from the ground up a feature rich application that enables a person to 

:::{admonition,warning} New Version of Profile Module Available
This program makes use of a new version of the Profile module. It is backwards compatible, so you can safely replace previous versions used in your program. You can download the new version here: [Profile v0.1.2](https://ics32-fa20.markbaldw.in/resources/Profile.py)
:::


### Summary of Program Requirements
* Subclass the Profile class in your DS program to support encryption and public key authentication.
* Read and understand documentation for a 3rd party library.
* Update your DS program to communicate with the new DS Server.

### Learning Goals
* Use inheritance to extend class functionality
* Install and use of 3rd party libraries
* Solidify understanding of modules and classes in Python

## Program Requirements

The ICS32 Distributed Social organization has decided to use the [NaCl](https://nacl.cr.yp.to/) networking and encryption library to help strengthen its social media platform. Rather than implement the NaCl specification directly, the DS org has decided to use a 3rd party library that is already written in Python called [PyNaCl](https://github.com/pyca/pynacl).

To prepare your ICS32 DS program for network communication using NaCl, there are a number of tasks you must complete. They have been divided into individual parts below to help you prioritize your program requirements.

### Part 1


```ipython3
```

### Extra Credit

For this final assignment in ICS32 you will have the opportunity to receive up to 3 extra credit points. To receive a signal extra credit point you must add at least one of the following features to your Tkinter GUI. You may **add up to 3** features for extra credit.

1. Add support for something

### How we will grade your submission
																		
This assignment will be graded on a 12-point scale, with the 12 points being allocated completely to whether or not you submitted something that meets all of the above requirements. The following rubric will be used:

Requirements and Function | 10 pts
: Does the program do what it is supposed to do?
: Are there any bugs or errors?

Quality and Design        | 2 pts 
: Is the code well designed?
: Is the code clearly documented?

By now you should be clearly documenting your code and expending effort to ensure that your code design follows the conventions we have been discussing throughout the class. Therefore, we will be taking a much stricter stance on quality and design than we have in previous assignments.

